[Music]
thank you
hi everyone welcome to the podcast my
name is Dr Mark eatonson I'm a licensed
psychologist specializing in the
treatment of pathological narcissism and
Related Disorders
so I apologize for the gap between the
last episode and this one like most
people this time of year I've been
really busy but I wouldn't really be
telling the whole story if I just left
it at that in all honesty making this
content gives me anxiety sometimes and
as a result I find myself sometimes
avoiding it I have lots of worries not
making content that's accurate enough
not making content that's accessible
enough discovering after the fact that
there's some flaw in the video or the
audio
Etc but my main worry is really about
criticism part of me is always aware of
just how charged the topic of narcissism
can be and I worry that somehow
somewhere the wrong person will watch
one of these videos misunderstand the
content and then post it to some Forum
where hundreds or even thousands of
like-minded individuals will decide to
pick up their torches
share this feeling with you because it's
on topic with today's episode which is
social anxiety
I have no idea if my fantasy of
accidentally stumbling into widespread
Internet Hate is plausible or even
possible after all my channel is quite
small
but the likelihood of such a thing
happening isn't really the point because
we're talking about feelings and
Fantasies here and by the way when I use
the word fantasy I'm not using it in the
typical sense to mean imagining
something positive I'm actually using it
in the analytic sense where it refers to
something that's conjured up in the mind
that could be positive or negative or
neutral and in this case my fantasy is
definitely negative
so my negative fantasy is about
humiliation and it's about ostracization
and these are the sorts of fears that
form the basis of social anxiety
now in my Psychotherapy work with
patients I often encounter this kind of
anxiety it's actually common to a number
of psychological conditions and
disorders but today I'll be speaking
specifically about social anxiety in
pathological narcissism and NPD the idea
that narcissists would be socially
anxious might seem counterintuitive
after all according to the DSM
narcissists are supposed to be grandiose
exhibitionistic and preoccupied with
fantasies of power Brilliance Perfection
and Beauty how could such an individual
ever really worry that other people
wouldn't like them or wouldn't want them
around but as I've often discussed on
this podcast and in many of my other
videos on the heel NPD YouTube channel
the DSM doesn't tell the whole story
about narcissism and if you're
interested in a much longer and more
detailed take on that topic please see
the two-part video series that I made
called what is narcissism essentially
the DSM omits the vulnerable symptoms of
NPD and those are the symptoms that
actually ground it as a disorder because
they're about about distress and
dysfunction
those are the experiences that cause
people with NPD and pathological
narcissism to seek treatment one of them
is often social anxiety and when you
really think about it it makes sense
that narcissists might be socially
anxious common wisdom on the matter
notwithstanding the narcissistic
personality style is built as a defense
around deeply held fears of Shame and
humiliation and a core belief of many
narcissists is that they need to be
perfect in order to be loved sometimes
this belief is conscious but perhaps
more often it's unconscious and this
core perfectionism is based on early and
traumatic experiences of rejection
neglect being chronically misunderstood
or mischaracterized being used to
gratify a parent or caregiver's
narcissistic strivings feeling hated
unwanted or worthless when not living up
to the unrealistic standards imposed by
their family of origin essentially
narcissists were forged in the Kiln of
the ever-present threat of catastrophic
rejection their entire personality style
is constructed to defend against ever
having to experience the Primitive Agony
to use a term coined by Donald winicot
of being discarded by caregivers who
either couldn't or wouldn't empathize
with their child's emotional needs
so when you've built your identity
around the idea that you're only as good
as you appear or only as good as you
perform and when your experience has
taught you that there's no safety net of
supportive or empathic care to catch you
if you tumble into the chasm below the
stakes can feel extremely high
there can be immense pressure to not
only be accepted and liked but to
actually go above and beyond narcissists
often feel pressure to be celebrated
admired idealized because to them this
represents the ultimate confirmation of
their value and worth and the ultimate
Safeguard against the loss of self that
comes from rejection
such high pressure to perform often
leads to Exquisite sensitivity to social
rejection and this is often the Paradox
of narcissistic grandiosity because it
may appear that the narcissist is really
convinced that they truly are
extraordinary when it's actually more
often the case that they have a core
sense that if they aren't extraordinary
then in some way they will cease to
exist such pressure is inherently
destabilizing the personality often
can't manage the ever-present
existential Terror and threat of the
loss of self and the result is often a
constant cycling between periods of
depression and compensatory hypomania
and if you haven't heard that term
before hypomania is a period of
heightened energy and activity and
expansive mood that can often lead to
disruptions in the person's life and
relationships
pathological narcissism is sometimes
actually mistaken for bipolar disorder
but in narcissism the swings between
depression and hypomania are caused by
intra-psychic Dynamics and the high
pressure to perform
so I've worked with many patients who
describe the feeling that they can walk
into any room and instantly become the
center of attention seizing the
spotlight through sheer force of charm
and Charisma and such experiences of
being on become the high that
narcissists Chase there can be a
desperation for it which leads to trying
too hard and forcing a situation and
narcissists who are caught in this cycle
will sometimes climb so far out on a
limb socially that it breaks under their
own weight
these same patients who talk about this
high of being on socially we'll also
talk about the pain of feeling like in
some essential way they are outside The
Human Experience
of the burden of always having to watch
themselves and always having to gauge
how well they're doing of not ever
feeling like they can relax or let
themselves truly be in the moment always
the object of their own scrutiny or the
imagined scrutiny of other people they
end up feeling sort of like the main
character in sartre's existential novel
nausea and if you haven't read that I
highly recommend it it's a fantastic
description the first person description
of the feeling of fragmentation of self
and the loss of identity
so narcissism is built on the feeling
that there are no safe objects there's
no reliability anyone could suddenly
turn cold rejecting and unempathic at
any moment and it's therefore up to the
narcissist to maintain a kind of social
hyper vigilance they're always watching
themselves to make sure that they're
doing well enough to Merit continued
social acceptance and approval and
they're always watching others for even
the slightest hint of rejection because
in their mind rejection is like the
tumbling Pebble on the Mountainside that
inevitably leads to the catastrophic
Avalanche
so what can be done if you're someone
who identifies with what I've described
here how can you begin to address your
social anxiety
well first remember that knowledge is
power
my former supervisor and Mentor would
always talk about what a difference it
makes to be able to know about something
that's happening inside of you perhaps
up until now the Dynamics that I've
described today were something that you
knew about implicitly or unconsciously
but not something that you'd ever really
been able to take a look at and parse
out
knowing about something is actually the
first step to being able to do something
about it so really get to know your
social anxiety
start with the assumption that your
anxiety is based on experience assume
that it makes a kind of sense that
there's an internal logic to it assume
that it's meaningful
validate your own feelings don't dismiss
them right off the bat as aberrant
irrational or pathological
doing so is often simply a way to
re-enter Yourself by abandoning the
parts of you that need support
remember you've lived through something
and now you're becoming aware of the
legacy of that experience
at the same time don't assume that your
feelings are an accurate reflection of
reality there are feelings and there are
facts and they're not the same thing
your sensitivity to feeling rejected
might mean that you're more likely to be
rejected but it might not
you're feeling that someone doesn't like
you might mean that they actually don't
like you but it also might not
I've worked with many patients who would
mercilessly berate themselves for saying
something at a party or a meeting or a
get-together that they felt was cringy
or embarrassing they assume that their
feeling of having said something
embarrassing means that they actually
did and it also means that now they're
somehow a bad object to everyone
in reality people seldom notice remember
or care about the little things that
other people say or do remember no one's
paying as much attention to you as you
are
often the feeling of social catastrophe
is just that a Feeling
understand that these are old feelings
they go way back they're like old
Plumbing buried in the walls you know
sometimes old Plumbing makes noise
sometimes it affects the water pressure
so factor that into your narrative that
you tell yourself about your social
anxiety
greet your concern about being disliked
rejected or humiliated with compassion
remind yourself that you're actually
hearing from a very young part of you
these feelings go all the way back to
Childhood possibly even very early
childhood before you could even talk
when feelings could wash over your whole
self and you didn't have any tools to
keep yourself from being Swept Away
try to have the same patience with
yourself as you would have with a very
small child
talk to yourself as if you were that
child I know it can feel silly but it
actually works
when you've gotten good
and making space for your feelings at
greeting them with compassion and
understanding and when you can recognize
the social anxiety that you feel as a
reflection of early experience rather
than a reflection of your actual Worth
or actual external reality then you
might be ready for the next step in
dealing with anxiety which is exposure
the best way to treat any anxiety is
through exposure
we naturally want to avoid situations
that make us feel anxious and over time
this leads to something called
generalization we start by avoiding the
thing that gives us anxiety and then we
start to avoid stuff that's associated
with that thing and eventually we start
avoiding things that are associated with
the associations
Etc and this is how people go from a
single panic attack to full-blown
agoraphobia and not being able to leave
the house
addressing anxiety involves
intentionally confronting the situations
that make us anxious we need to feel the
anxiety and then when we come out the
other side we can reflect on the fact
that it didn't kill us
we survived it was unpleasant yeah but
uh not fatal and over time our range of
motion increases so in some ways that's
what I'm doing by recording this episode
today I'm exposing to my anxiety every
time I make one of these and then
somebody tells me that it helped them I
get a little bit better at tolerating
that anxiety and every time somebody
criticizes me online I'm able to reflect
on the fact that I can survive people
saying bad things about me we all have
our fears and our anxieties some people
are terrified of dogs others airplanes
many narcissists are socially anxious
but some aren't many other people have
social anxiety for reasons that have
nothing to do with narcissism
whatever burden you bear try to greet it
and yourself with compassion and
understanding remember the difference
between feelings and facts
challenge yourself to increase your
range of motion in the world rather than
allowing your life
to become narrow
okay so that's it for today as always
let me know if you have comments
questions or suggestions for future
episodes and until next time take good
care
[Music]
thank you